.TH DNS-UPDATE 1 "July 23, 2026" "dns-update" "User Commands"
.\" This document uses ASD-STE100 Simplified Technical English.
.SH NAME
dns-update \- keep DNS A and AAAA records aligned with egress IP addresses
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B dns-update
[\fB\-version\fR|\fB\-\-version\fR]
[\fB\-h\fR|\fB\-\-h\fR|\fB\-help\fR|\fB\-\-help\fR]
[\fB\-config\fR \fIPATH\fR]
[\fB\-delete\fR[=\fIa|aaaa|both\fR]]
[\fB\-dry-run\fR]
[\fB\-force-push\fR]
[\fB\-validate-config\fR]
[\fB\-print-effective-config\fR]
[\fB\-timeout\fR \fIDURATION\fR]
[\fB\-verbose\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B dns-update
probes the current IPv4 and IPv6 egress addresses.
It compares these addresses with the configured DNS A and AAAA records.
It changes records that do not match.
With
.B \-force-push,
the program refreshes an existing address record
that matches an observed address.
.B \-delete
selects an explicit delete mode.
This mode skips egress probing.
It removes managed
.B A
and/or
.B AAAA
records for the configured name. Bare
.B \-delete
deletes both families. Use
.BR \-delete=a ,
.BR \-delete=aaaa ,
or
.BR \-delete=both
to select a family.
The value
.B true
also selects both families.
The values
.B false
and
.B none
disable delete mode.
The delete value is not case-sensitive.
Delete mode is compatible with
.BR \-dry-run
and mutually exclusive with
.BR \-force-push .
.P
Use a native scheduler for periodic operation.
Use systemd on Linux.
Use launchd on macOS.
Use Task Scheduler on Windows.
The program supports dry-run execution and bounded retries.
It reads live DNS state before it applies a change.
.P
Each probe response must parse as
.B ip=<address>
or
.BR ip=none .
If one probe family fails, reconciliation stops by default.
When the JSON config sets
.B probe.allow_partial_failure
to
.BR true ,
the program logs a warning.
It reconciles only the successful family.
The failed family stays unchanged.
If both probe families fail, reconciliation stops.
Only explicit
.B ip=none
removes a managed address family.
.P
The provider-offline introspection modes,
.BR \-validate-config
and
.BR \-print-effective-config ,
load and validate the assembled config.
This validation includes the configured Cloudflare token-file path.
These modes stop before provider initialization.
They do not contact Cloudflare.
.P
The packaged systemd deployment stores the Cloudflare token at
.IR /etc/dns-update/cloudflare.token .
The
.B LoadCredential=
setting copies it into the service credential directory.
The configured token path must identify a regular file.
Deeper path components cannot be symlinks.
Published packages do not use self-unpacking binary compression.
Thus, the installed binary works with the hardened systemd unit.
.P
Published releases also include macOS and Windows archives.
These platforms use native schedulers.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-version ", " \-\-version
Print the binary version to standard output.
Exit without config loading or provider contact.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-h ", " \-help ", " \-\-help
Print flag help to standard error.
Exit without config loading or provider contact.
.TP
.B \-config
Load config from the specified JSON file.
If you omit this option and
.B DNS_UPDATE_CONFIG
is unset, the program first searches
.I config.json
in the current working directory.
It then searches
.I /etc/dns-update/config.json .
.TP
.B \-dry-run
Print the planned changes.
The program does not change DNS records.
.TP
.B \-delete
Delete managed address records.
Do not reconcile to observed egress IPs.
Bare
.B \-delete
deletes both
.B A
and
.B AAAA
records. Use
.BR \-delete=a ,
.BR \-delete=aaaa ,
or
.BR \-delete=both
to select the affected record families.
The value
.B true
also selects both families.
The values
.B false
and
.B none
disable delete mode.
The delete value is not case-sensitive.
This option is mutually exclusive with
.BR \-force-push .
.TP
.B \-force-push
Refresh an existing A or AAAA record that matches an observed address.
This option does not create a missing record.
.TP
.B \-validate-config
Load and validate the assembled config.
Validate the configured Cloudflare token-file path.
Print
.B config is valid
to standard output.
Exit before provider initialization or Cloudflare network calls.
This option is mutually exclusive with
.BR \-print-effective-config .
.TP
.B \-print-effective-config
Load and validate the assembled config.
Validate the configured Cloudflare token-file path.
Print the assembled effective config as JSON.
Exit before provider initialization or Cloudflare network calls.
This option is mutually exclusive with
.BR \-validate-config .
.TP
.B \-timeout
Limit one reconciliation or delete cycle.
The limit includes retries and backoff.
A value of
.B 0
disables the global timeout.
.TP
.B \-verbose
Enable debug logging.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B DNS_UPDATE_CONFIG
Path to the JSON configuration file. This has the same effect as
.BR \-config .
.TP
.B DNS_UPDATE_DRY_RUN
Boolean override for
.BR \-dry-run .
.TP
.B DNS_UPDATE_VERBOSE
Boolean override for
.BR \-verbose .
.TP
.B DNS_UPDATE_TIMEOUT
Duration override for
.BR \-timeout .
.TP
.B DNS_UPDATE_PROVIDER_CLOUDFLARE_API_TOKEN_FILE
Override only the configured Cloudflare token-file path.
The packaged systemd service uses this variable for its credential file.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ./config.json
The program searches this path first when you omit both
.BR \-config
and
.BR DNS_UPDATE_CONFIG .
.TP
.I /etc/dns-update/config.json
Fallback JSON configuration file for packaged and systemd deployments.
.TP
.I /etc/dns-update/config.example.json
Shipped sample configuration for packaged deployments.
.TP
.I /etc/dns-update/cloudflare.token
Source file for the Cloudflare API token used by packaged systemd deployments.
.TP
.I /etc/dns-update/dns-update.env
Optional environment overrides for packaged systemd deployments.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success or requested help.
.TP
.B 1
A config, output, provider, reconciliation, delete, or verification operation
failed.
.TP
.B 2
Command-line usage or flag parsing failed.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR systemd (1),
.BR systemd.timer (5)
